---
title: LensKit 2.0 M1 released
kind: article
created_at: Aug 16, 2013
---

Today sees the release of the first milestone for LensKit 2.0 (2.0-M1).  LensKit 2.0 will feature a
number of cleaned up (and often simplified!) APIs.  Unfortunately, that comes at the expense of
backwards compatibility; projects using LensKit will need notable upgrades for LensKit 2.0.

The [release notes](http://dev.grouplens.org/lenskit/lenskit2//releases/lenskit-2.0.html) contain
a number of the changes; the
[change log](https://github.com/grouplens/lenskit/commits/branch/lenskit2) is the definitive
source of change information.

## Data Structure Cleanup

We've cleaned up the side channel API for sparse vectors and scored IDs; side channels with unboxed
doubles (for scored IDs) and side channel vectors (for sparse vectors) are now conceptually special
cases of general-purpose side channels storing arbitrary, type-safe data.

We have also made the way you construct data structures more consistent.  All data structure classes
now have static factory methods and/or builders; public constructors are deprecated.  In Effective
Java, Joshua Bloch makes a good case for this being a better way of constructing objects, and it is
confusing to construct some objects using constructors and others using factory methods.  So all the
classes in `lenskit-data-structures` have been updated to consistently use factory methods.

We have also deprecated a number of classes that are no longer needed, or at least not needed much.
`LongCursor` is going away (see the next section), as are pointers.

Finally, we've done some under-the-hood improvements on sparse vectors to improve code reuse.
Maintaining them is much more pleasant now.

## New DAO infrastructure

LensKit 1.x had a monolithic Data Access Object that everything used to get access to data.  This,
combined with `DAOFactory` objects, made for some unhelpful complexity: you had to manage factories,
writing wrapper DAOs was difficult, and there were a lot of methods to implement in a DAO.

[EventDAO]: http://dev.grouplens.org/lenskit/lenskit2/apidocs/org/grouplens/lenskit/data/dao/EventDAO.html

In LensKit 2.0, DAOs have been completely restructured.  There are now multiple DAO interfaces for
different types of data and different access patterns.  The base DAO, [EventDAO][], provides streaming
access to events using a `Cursor`.  There are several related DAOs, such as `UserEventDAO` that
allows events to be queried by user, and `ItemEventDAO` to query by item.  The default implementations
of these DAOs stream all events into memory and store them in a map keyed by user or item.  If you
want to write your own DAO, you can implement the very simple interface in `EventDAO` and get the
remaining required behavior easily (albeit somewhat inefficiently).

LensKit integrators can now implement each of the interfaces against their database, either in
separate objects or in a single DAO that implements all available interfaces.  The DAO implementation
can also be configured via dependency injection; it is no longer special-cased using the DAO factory.

Components can now depend on just the DAO interfaces they need.  And if no components use some DAO
functionality, you no longer have to implement it in your custom DAO, without violating interface
expectations.

Note that DAOs are expected to be fast: a custom `UserEventDAO` implementation should probably cache
user histories.  It's intended that new DAO instances will be constructed for each recommender
session now, though, so you can easily do per-request caching simply by caching in the instance.
This is important, as the user's history may be requested multiple times while servicing the same
request.

If you need to build and use the recommender with different DAOs, it's a bit tricky right now.  The
way it is supported will be greatly improved for the final release of LensKit 2.0.

## Simplified component interfaces

Several core component interfaces are now simpler.  We've removed the deprecated inheritance
relationship between `RatingPredictor` and `ItemScorer`.  We've also removed all methods from
the predictors, scorers, and recommenders that take a user history: the component is expected to
get the history, if it needs it, from the `UserEventDAO`.  This depends on fast, caching DAOs, but
makes the interfaces simpler to implement and code to.  The number of methods is now cut in half on
many of these interfaces.

## Have fun!

[issue list]: https://github.com/grouplens/lenskit/issues?milestone=19&state=closed
[mailing list]: https://wwws.cs.umn.edu/mm-cs/listinfo/lenskit

We hope LensKit 2.0 will be the easiest-to-use version of LensKit yet, but it's still a work-in-progress.
But if you're feeling adventurous, please try it out, report bugs, and give us feedback on the
[mailing list][].  You can also watch our [issue list][] for some of the things we have left to do.

- [Binary archive](/downloads/lenskit-2.0-M1.zip) ([tar.gz](/downloads/lenskit-2.0-M1.tar.gz)
- [Source archive](/downloads/lenskit-2.0-M1-source.zip) ([tar.gz](/downloads/lenskit-2.0-M1-source.tar.gz))

It's also pushed to Maven Central.
