---
title: LensKit 2.0 released
kind: article
created_at: Sep 2, 2013
---

We are pleased to announce the release of LensKit 2.0.  LensKit features a number of cleaned up and simplified APIs, some of which break backwards compatibility.

As usual, you can find a change-oriented summary in the [release notes](/maven-site/releases/lenskit-2.0.html).

Most of the changes were announced with [LensKit 2.0 M1](./2013-08-16-lenskit-2.0-M1.html).  In addition, we've made the following API-breaking changes:

## Baseline predictors are item scorers

We removed the `BaselinePredictor` interface, in favor of having baseline predictors just implement `ItemScorer`.  There's now a `@BaselineScorer` qualifier that indicates that a particular item scorer will be used in a baseline capacity.  `SimpleRatingPredictor` still uses a baseline scorer as a fallback for the primary item scorer, and `FallbackItemScorer` replaces `BaselineItemScorer` for implementing a general stack of two scorers, with a baseline providing defaults in case a primary fails.

Any configuration using a baseline scorer will need to change.  For example, to use the user-mean scorer:

```
config.bind(BaselineScorer.class, ItemScorer.class)
      .to(UserMeanItemScorer.class);
```

All baseline scorers have changed their names:

- `ItemMeanPredictor` is now `ItemMeanRatingItemScorer`
- `GlobalMeanPredictor` is now `GlobalMeanRatingItemScorer`
- `ConstantPredictor` is now `ConstantItemScorer`
- `UserMeanPredictor` is now `UserMeanItemScorer`

## `ItemUserMeanPredictor` removed

The `ItemUserMeanPredictor` has been removed completely.  Its functionality has been replaced by allowing the user-mean item scorer to use an arbitrary baseline for averaging user offsets; this is controlled by an `ItemScorer` dependency qualified with `UserMeanBaseline`.  So, if you used to use an `ItemUserMeanPredictor`, now do this:

```
config.bind(BaselineScorer.class, ItemScorer.class)
      .to(UserMeanItemScorer.class);
config.bind(UserMeanBaseline.class, ItemScorer.class)
      .to(ItemMeanRatingItemScorer.class);
```

## Deprecated APIs removed

Almost all deprecated APIs have been removed.  This includes many deprecated APIs in the data structures module.  To ease the transition, we released 2.0-M2 prior to removing many deprecated APIs; you can update your code to 2.0-M2, fix all deprecation warnings, and then update to the final 2.0 release.

## Have fun!

We hope you enjoy using this version of LensKit.  If you have problems, please [raise them on the mailing list](https://wwws.cs.umn.edu/mm-cs/listinfo/lenskit) or [report bugs](https://github.com/grouplens/lenskit/issues).
